## Research Relevance - Mapping Alluvial Fans on Mars

Alluvial fans are sedimentary landforms that are commonly left behind by past flowing water on Mars. They form when a stream of water carrying sediment reaches a wider, flatter area, the water slows down and spreads out, and the suspended sediment is deposited into a fan-shaped structure. Over 1500 fan-shaped landforms have been found and cataloged on Mars (e.g. Morgan et al. 2022). These fans are a key piece of evidence that ancient Mars had persistent liquid water on its surface, which indicates there were periods of warm, potentially habitable conditions.

Analyzing the morphology of alluvial fans can provide a window into the ancient Martian hydrologic cycle, but the process is time-consuming and difficult. For example, Anderson et al. (2023) mapped 27 alluvial fans on Mars to obtain morphological measurements (e.g. catchment volume, number of ridges, slope) that are used to constrain aspects of the ancient hydrologic cycle like discharge rates and time of fan formation. To map these features, the authors had to simultaneously analyze multiple spatial datasets from CTX, MOLA, THEMIS, HiRISE, and several Digital Elevation Models (DEMs). The time and effort required to perform this manual image analysis is a limiting factor in the number of alluvial fans that can be mapped in a given study, as the authors were only able to analyze 27/1500 = 1.8% of the known fans on Mars.

In this project we plan to create a tool for automatically mapping alluvial fans on Mars using a newly developed self-supervised learning algorithm. We will apply the image segmentation from Saha et al. 2022, which has proven effective for distinguishing features (e.g., buildings, roads) in satellite imagery of Earth's cities. This algorithm was initially applied to **one** multi-band image (RGB) and does not require labels or any other data to train. We will apply this algorithm to a multi-band image of an alluvial fan on Mars with up to 12 bands that include black and white images, digital elevation models, and infrared images. We will then compare the results to a geologic map of the area (Pondricelli et al. 2011) to evaluate how the model performs and refine our approach. The ultimate goal is to apply this algorithm to all of the known fans on Mars and derive new paleoclimate insights, but for this project our goal is to demonstrate that it will work on a single fan.

References

- Anderson, R. B., Williams, R. M. E., Gullikson, A. L. & Nelson, W. S. Morphology and paleohydrology of intracrater alluvial fans north of Hellas Basin, Mars. Icarus 394, 115122 (2023).
- Morgan, A. M., Wilson, S. A. & Howard, A. D. The global distribution and morphologic characteristics of fan-shaped sedimentary landforms on Mars. Icarus 385, 115137 (2022).
- Pondrelli, M. et al. Geological, geomorphological, facies and allostratigraphic maps of the Eberswalde fan delta. Planet. Space Sci. 59, 1166–1178 (2011).
- Saha, S., Shahzad, M., Mou, L., Song, Q. & Zhu, X. X. Unsupervised Single-Scene Semantic Segmentation for Earth Observation. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 60, 1–11 (2022).
